have to make sure it's going first mr. Fowler like
to have you tell us something about your early life
including the the names of your parents the dates
of their birth and death the places where they were
born and the place where you were born and where you
went to school before you went to A&M Well, my
father was William Edward Fowler, and he was a
physician and lived in Huntsville, where I was
reared. And my mother was named Georgie Corbin
McClanahan, and she was from a little town outside
of Temple, Texas, Ohinoville.
My mother died in 1911 and my father in 1936.
And I, as I said, I was reared in Huntsville and went
through the public schools and graduated from the
Huntsville High School in 1916. And from
Huntsville High School then the following fall
you went directly to A&M? That's right. What was
the procedure for getting into school at A&M at
that point? I went over during the summer with some
other boys and registered and Huntsville High
School is a very small school and fortunately we
had, we didn't have a bunch of electives and we had a
necessary credits to get in. So you kind of
pre-registered then before the school started?
Yes. Were you at that point assigned to a military
company? I don't remember that. I don't believe
so. I think we chose that after we went back to
school. Did you have some choice in the company
that you went to? Yes. I had a friend who had been in
B-2nd and I tried and did get into that company.
You said you had some friends who went over there
with you. Was it the acquaintance with people who
had gone to A&M before that led you to go to school
there?
I don't know. A&M just always seemed the place to go
for me. Well, you were very close to it in
Huntsville. That's right. Of course, then that
was a pretty tedious deal to get there. You had to
travel on the plane, go down to Conroe and over to
Hearn, I believe it was, and then back to college.
Kind of almost all the way around Robbinsborn. You
sure were. Let's see, Huntsville's only about 30
miles away. No, no, it's about 80 or 90 miles. From
college. From college. I was thinking Huntsville
was closer than that. I think I'm correct about
that, I'm not sure. But you had to go, actually when
you were going to Conroe, you were going away from
College Station, weren't you? Yes. And then over
to Hearn, and then back down to College Station.
What was your first reaction to the school and to
the community of College Station when you arrived
there? Oh, I liked it from the very first.
Had you been to the campus prior to the time you went
there to register? No. You hadn't gone there to any
ball games or anything like that? No.
Was there someone there to meet the train to sort of
help you get from the train station to the college?
Or did you have to find your own way? I don't
remember.
Could you describe a typical day while you were a
student, including the things of what time you got
up and how you were awakened and how many hours you
spent in class and what other things you did in the
day besides class and what was the procedure for
going to bed? Well, they blew revelry of course on
that. big law on that campus foghorn out there by
the flagpole and then we had calisthenics drill
and then went to breakfast and most of our theory
classes were in the mornings and the labs were in
the afternoons and then we had study hours at night
with a sentinel walk in the halls, and I believe
Capps was at 10 o'clock or something like that. Did
you have the sentinel the whole four years you were
there, or was there a change somewhere during the
time? I believe they had that system the whole four
years. Do you recall, you mentioned that the bugle
was blown at the flagpole. Where was the flagpole
located at that point? Same place it is. On the old
military walk in front of the main building. In
front of the main building. At one time, we have a
picture of the campus that I'm not sure it's dated,
but the flag pulled out in the middle of the drill
field. No. That would make it a little further
away. Do you remember the dormitories you lived
in? Well, I was a freshman in Leggett Hall, and then
I lived in Mitchell. across the Military Walk one
year and the last two years I was in Goodwin. Those
were all I believe fairly new dormitories at the
time were they not? Yes. So they all had pretty good
bathroom facilities in each of the buildings as
opposed to something like Ross Hall which I
believe had them only on one floor. I was surprised
the main building was only about two years old when
I went over there. And of course, I didn't realize
that until much later. We just assumed it had been
there always, you know. Yeah, I believe the
original one burned about two years before, well,
about four years before you came. Yeah, I think
this one was completed in 14 or something like
that. And you wouldn't believe the price. Well, I
might. I've seen what some of the other buildings
cost. Today it costs us a good bit more to go in and
air condition some of those buildings that we
built 50 years ago. It costs them more to air
condition them than it did to build them.
What was life like in those dormitories? Was it
pretty quiet or did it get pretty rambunctious at
times? Oh, we had some fun once in a while, but in
general, it was pretty quiet. What sort of thing
did you do for fun in the dormitory? Well, you might
put a pan of water over a guy's door so when he opened
the door, it'd fall on his head or something like
that, about the extent of it. Did you ever dump
water on him when he was in bed? No. No? Drowned him
out?
Did you have much to complain about the food? No. It
was all pretty good? Yes.
Was there much variety, or did you have pretty much
the same thing each day of each week? I don't
remember. Any particular meals that you
remember? No. I have a couple people that
mentioned that they had steak every Thursday.
Mm-hmm. We did have steaks occasionally, but I
don't remember just what days.
Did the upperclassmen enjoy certain privileges
that the freshmen did not have? Yes. What kinds of
things could they do? Well, I remember it was very
difficult for a freshman to get off the campus on
the weekend. but the upperclassmen could go to
Brian.
Any other things that the upperclassmen could do?
I don't remember anything particularly. We had to
learn their names and speak to them and call them by
name. Of course, there weren't so many of them. Did
you have to call them by name each time you saw them?
Yes, you're supposed to. Well, at a later date, I
remember when I visited A&M campus When I was an
undergraduate at Texas Lutheran,
every stranger on campus was greeted by every
Aggie he encountered, but I didn't remember
hearing the Aggies greet each other by names. They
used the same greeting for Aggies as they did for
visitors, as I recall.
What sorts of things did you have to do for the
upperclassmen when you were a freshman?
I don't recall anything particularly. I did a lot
of work on the Longhorn and the battalion for some
of the upperclassmen who were on the staffs.
Would this have been primarily in the line of
artwork? Yes. Well, I was wondering, some of the
people have indicated they frequently had to run
errands for some of the upperclassmen. would have
to sometimes carry their clothes
over to the laundry and things of that nature. No.
You don't remember having to do much of that. Some
people have said they made beds and things like
that, shine shoes and cleaned rifles. No. You
missed out on all those. Yeah.
Was there any way that a visitor to the campus could
visually distinguish between members of a
particular class? In other words, was there
something that identified a freshman or a
sophomore or a junior or senior? Quite obviously,
they had various military ranks. Other than that,
I don't recall.
You don't recall. OK. sorts of things did the
students do for entertainment or recreation
during the times when, say, they were not in class
or if they couldn't go to Bryan for one reason or
another? They had a picture show for the freshmen
or any of the students every Saturday night in the
old air dome. It was covered, but the sides were
open. And they had a picture show over there every
night, every Saturday night. Was this a free
picture show? Yes. What sorts of movies did they
run generally? Most anything that was available?
I imagine so. Fairly current movies, or did
they... Oh, we didn't know what was current. It was
just something to do then. But primarily the
freshmen would go to that because I think they were
not allowed off campus after five or something
like that on Saturdays. Could I tell you a little
incident about that that was real funny?
Certainly. Streaking on A&M campus back that far,
would you believe that? We were painting the
scenery for the senior class play in 20, and we got
behind and had to work one Saturday night. And, of
course, you have to let the freshmen go to the
picture show, and a shower came up during the show,
and I went over and cornered my crew and told them to
get on down to the basement of Guyon Hall. And they
said, well, it's raining. We don't have our
raincoats. And I said, well, that's your problem,
and went on down the military walk in my slicker. In
a few minutes, across the corner of the drill
field, there was a big flash of lightning. And it
looked like a bunch of Greek white marble statues,
these boys running. They had stripped off every
bit of their clothing, rolled it up, and put it
under their hats. When I got the guy in Hall's
basement, they were putting on their dry clothes
ready to paint. Well, that showed a little bit of
ingenuity. Yes. But you mentioned painting the
scenery for the senior class play. Yes. Was that
during your senior year? Yes, that was it. Do you
remember what the play was? No, I don't. Was that a
regular custom that the senior class put on a play?
Yes. Did they charge admission then to the
students, or was it a free performance? Gee, I
don't remember. We took it over to Brian, I know,
and had some performances over there. Well, I was
interested in that. No one else had ever mentioned
to me that the senior class had put on a play.
Were there any other performances
of that type that were put on during the year that
students could go to, say other than the picture
show and the senior class play? Did any of the other
classes put on a play? I don't think so. Were there
any outside people coming in to lecture or things
of that nature? We didn't have very much of that
back then. Did you go to the YMCA to play games or
anything of that sort? Oh yes. What sorts of games
did you play over there? Well I believe we had pool
and of course Casey's Confectionery was in the
basement over there and it was quite a hangout
place if you had 15 cents for a molded milk.
At one point there was a swimming pool in the
basement of the Y. Was that there when you were
there or was that later? I don't recall that.
Because I think the Y must have been fairly new when
you were there. Was that in about 1914 or something
like that when it was opened?
I noticed you attained ultimately the rank of
second lieutenant. Did the officers in the Corps
enjoy any particular privileges that were not
available to the regular students?
As far as I know, they had a staff table in the dining
hall for the regimental staff. But the cadet
officers ate with their companies. So it would
just be, but they had the same, the regimental
officers had the same food. Yes. Except they just
didn't have any freshmen at their table. Yeah,
that's right. Okay. Did you have any favorite
teachers or instructors when you were at A&M?
I don't believe so. I think your field was
architecture. Was Ernest Langford there at all
when you were there? I don't believe he was there. I
have known him since very well. I hope you get a
chance you'll give him a call. Oh, I certainly
will. He was my predecessor as archivist. Yes, I
know. And so I'll certainly try to give him a call
and give him your regards. I'd appreciate that.
What sort of feelings did the students have
towards the administration of the school? And I
think there was a dual kind of administration with
President Bazell, more or less in charge of the
academic end of it, and the commandant of the bull
in charge of the military end. That's right.
Did the students think pretty highly of both of
these people? I think so. Who was the commandant
when you were there? Bull Muller. Muller? Muller.
Now how would you spell that? M-U-E-L-L-E-R, I
believe. And then Ike Ashman was there at the later
years. I gather he was a fairly popular... Very,
very popular. I was fortunate that I belonged to a
little club they called the Junta. there. A few
faculty members organized this and then they each
selected one senior cadet and they each member
presented a paper sometime during the year but
they were men like Ike Ashburn and D. X. Bible and
Tommy Mayo the librarian, Mr. Thomas from the
English department and so forth. I appreciated
getting to know those men. So you had this junta, or
club, was made up of half faculty and half senior
students? Yes, each faculty member invited one
cadet. You might ask McQuillan about that, he was a
member. Did the students as well as the faculty
members present papers? Yes, on any subject you
chose. It didn't have to be the field in which you
were majoring. No. Do you have any recollection of
what you presented a paper on? Yes, I do. I
presented a paper on the characteristics of a
people as revealed in their monumental
architecture. Of course, if you study it enough,
practically reveals every facet of their lives,
political, religious, social, and everything.
From what I have learned of Dr. Mayo since I've been
at A&M, I gather that must have been a kind of paper
that would have interested him. In his later life,
at least, he was interested in the cycles between
romantic and realistic in art and architecture
and literature. He was quite a brilliant man.
Anything I have heard about him indicates that
that was the case.
Do you remember anything about the customs or
traditions which were in existence when you were
there?
We know there was some amount of hazing things of
that nature. Was there a bonfire for the
University of Texas football game or for any other
football game that you remember? I don't remember
about that.
What about a muster on 21st of April?
I don't recall that on the campus either. Well,
that's sort of a big day today,
currently I should say.
Were there any girls in any of the classes that you
attended? No, there were one or two girls who were
daughters of professors that went to classes, but
I was not in a class with one of them. Do you remember
who the girls were?
No. Okay.
We know that at least a portion of the students who
were on campus when you were there had employment
of one type or other. Did you have any employment
while you were at school? Yes, I did. When I was a
freshman, I worked student labor in the
Department of Drawing for Scripp Mitchell and I
filed and recorded grades on drawings. 15 cents an
hour. About how many hours did you put in in a week?
No, not many. Architecture requires a gradient of
time from a student. So there's Mr. Mitchell, you
called him script. He would grade the drawings.
Yes, and then I would record the grades in his
record books and then file the drawings as they
were returned to the students at the end of this. So
you had a separate file for each student then, I
take it? I don't know how we did it exactly, or
classes anyway. At the end of the year, the student
would get all of these drawings back? Yes. Did you
have any other? I also worked for the Extension
Department making charts and graphs, you know, or
circle divided into segments, different
percentage. And I was really going good on that
there by the time I graduated. They were paying me
50 cents an hour for it, and I was getting students
to do it for 25, 10 cents over their student rate.
And I remember at the Dallas Fair, I think we did
about $40 worth of work. That was a big deal. This
was for the Agricultural Extension Service
there? Yes.
or any other things that you can recall along that
line that you did? No, I don't think so. Did you work
for the, I take it you worked for the Extension
Service for what, more than one year? Yes. Oh, we
started out making, you know, like plans of a pig
feeding crawl for a chicken deal or something.
This would be for some of the, this would be some of
the bullet, that they use these illustrations in
some of the bulletins,
uh-huh. Okay. Did the students who participated
in athletics, like on the college football team or
the basketball team, have any privileges that
normal, regular students didn't enjoy? Not that I
know of. A couple of people have said they knew that
they had a training table. Well, I know they had
that. They ate. But I don't know what they ate. Do
you know Henry Harrison over in Bryan? Doctor?
Veterinarian? No. He's one of my classmates. He
was on the football team. I believe Huron Allen
mentioned him. He had some pictures of a 1919
football team. He mentioned Chick Harrison, I
believe he was called. That's the boy. Oh, another
job I had was, I believe it was a custom that the team
that won the game got to kept the to keep the
football they were playing with at the end of the
game. And for the athletic department, we put the
game and the score on those footballs, and I did
that for a while. You did that. I have a couple of
those footballs in the archives. One is the 1939
National Championship ball and it's signed by I
think everybody who played on the team and it has to
score. See I believe they played Tulane I believe
in that game and I have that one and I believe I have
another one when we beat the University of Texas
and pointed to nothing I believe in that score is on
there. Of course I was down there when we had those
two years of I believe we were unscored on for two
whole years. I believe so. In 1917 and 1919, the
football team was unscored on.
One of the things which happened while you were
there was this incident of some Aggies going over
to Austin to brand their longhorn steer. Did you
have any knowledge about that? Not until it was all
over.
Along the same line, we have some indication in the
archives that this same steer was later butchered
and they had a banquet over at Austin to which
some people from A&M and some people from Austin
were invited. Did you have any indication of this
while you were studying? No. We have reason to
believe that it was in January of 1920 We have a copy
of an invitation to it, but we haven't found out
anything else about
it. Did you have any opportunity to participate in
either the First or the Second World War? I only
belonged to the Students Army Training Corps that
they had there at college.
And that was during, what, your junior year? 1918
and 19? Yes. Actually, it was only the fall part of
1918, I guess, and you were discharged and
enrolled in regular school again in January. Yes,
we were discharged in December of that year. And
then by the time the second one rolled around while
you were Overage is for me. Not quite overage, but I
did construction work principally under the
Corps of Engineers. So you were sort of a civilian
employee for the Corps of Engineers. Well, not for
contractors who were working for them. It was sort
of a necessary defense job. Yeah, we did the
Longhorn Ordnance Plant over on Caddo Lake, And
then I went up to Canada and I was at Whitehorse for
about a year on the building the pipeline up there.
Let's see, I noticed that according to your
Longhorn in 1920, you were in Bee Company the
second regiment here as a fish, and then you
switched to E Company. Was that a fairly common
practice, switching from company to company?
Well, I was probably one of the least military men
on the campus, or that's ever been there, and I
think they were glad to get me out and be second. It
was a real fine military company. Uh-huh. So what
did they... Well, E was good, but I mean they
weren't They were a little bit more
run-of-the-mill. I gather there was a pretty
fierce competition between the companies, was
there not? Yes. For outstanding grades or what
have you in drill. So did you request a switch to E or
did somebody request that for you? I don't
remember.